DISEASES KNOWN TO
MEDICAL SCIENCE.
IT CAN BE TRANSMITTED
THROUGH PERSON-TO-PERSON
CONTACT OR SIMPLY BY
TOUCHING AN INFECTED SURFACE.
AND EVERY YEAR IN THE
UNITED STATES ALONE,
IT PLAYS A MAJOR
ROLE IN THE DEATH
OF TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE.
IT'S INFLUENZA
- THE "FLU".
*
MAJOR FUNDING FOR HEALTHY
BODY, HEALTHY MIND
IS PROVIDED BY
GE HEALTHCARE -
HELPING TO PREDICT,
DIAGNOSE, INFORM AND TREAT
SO THAT INDIVIDUALS
CAN LIVE A FULL LIFE.
AND BY SANOFI AVENTIS -
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD,
EVERYDAY, EVERYWHERE,
WORKING FOR WHAT REALLY
MATTERS - HEALTH.
WELCOME TO HEALTHY
BODY, HEALTHY MIND,
I'M DR. PERRY KRICHMAR.
FOR AS LONG AS HUMANS
HAVE ROAMED THE EARTH,
DISEASE HAS LEFT
ITS MARK ON THE
QUALITY AND
LONGEVITY OF LIFE.
THE INFLUENZA VIRUS IS
CHIEF AMONG SUCH DISEASES.
IT CAN BRING ABOUT A
MISERABLE FEW DAYS
OF ILLNESS AT BEST, OR AT
WORST, ALLOW COMPLICATIONS
THAT CAN LEAD TO DEATH.
AND THAT'S JUST THE
TYPICAL FLU STRAIN
WE'RE ALL FAMILIAR WITH.
THIS IS NOT A
TRIVIAL ILLNESS.
INFLUENZA CAUSES 35,000 TO
50,000 DEATHS EVERY YEAR,
INFLUENZA CAUSES
200,000 TO 300,000
HOSPITALIZATIONS
EVERY YEAR -
THIS IS NOT A
TRIVIAL ILLNESS.
YES INDEED, IN FACT WE
KNOW THAT DURING INFLUENZA
SEASON, HOSPITALIZATIONS
AND DEATHS DUE TO OTHER
CONDITIONS SUCH AS
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE,
HEART ATTACK OR
STROKE, ALL GO UP.
INFLUENZA VIRUSES ARE
VIRUSES WHICH INFECT
THE CELLS OF THE
RESPIRATORY TRACT,
AND THEY INFECT THOSE
CELLS, GROW IN THOSE CELLS,
AND KILL THOSE CELLS.
AND THAT PROCESS CAUSES
THE SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
OF THE DISEASE, INFLUENZA.
AND INFLUENZA'S ABILITY TO
CHEMICALLY CHANGE ITSELF
JUST ENOUGH TO MAKE LAST
YEAR'S VACCINE INEFFECTIVE,
GIVES IT A
STEALTH-LIKE QUALITY
THAT KEEPS SCIENCE
ON ITS TOES.
TRACKING INFLUENZA VIRUSES
AND THEIR CHANGES OVER TIME
IS A TRICKY GAME BECAUSE
THE ULTIMATE REASON
WE WANT TO TRACK
INFLUENZA VIRUSES
IS TO PRODUCE A VACCINE
FOR THE NEXT SEASON.
AND THE INFLUENZA VIRUSES
ARE A MOVING TARGET REALLY.
AND NOT ONLY THAT, BUT
EVERY 30 TO 50 YEARS
AN INFLUENZA
VIRUS SHOWS UP
THAT CAUSES A
WORLDWIDE PANDEMIC.
THE CONSEQUENCE IS THE
DEATH OF MILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
WE'LL LEARN MORE ABOUT
INFLUENZA EPIDEMICS
AND PANDEMICS
IN A MOMENT.
BUT FIRST, HERE'S TODAY'S
HEALTHY BODY, HEALTHY MIND
"DID YOU KNOW".
ONE OF THE HALLMARKS OF
INFLUENZA IS THAT IT AFFECTS
VIRTUALLY 100% OF THE
POPULATION AT SOME POINT.
AND THE FLU VIRUS FROM
LAST YEAR WON'T BE
THE SAME ONE THIS YEAR.
AND THAT'S WHERE
CORRESPONDENT
JULIE DONALDSON
BEGINS THE STORY.
THANKS PERRY.
FOR MANY OF US, JUST
MENTIONING THE WORD "FLU"
CAN BRING A FLOOD
OF BAD MEMORIES:
FEVER, MUSCLE ACHE,
COUGHING AND CONGESTION.
BUT THERE'S MUCH MORE
TO UNDERSTAND ABOUT
THIS MYSTERIOUS DISEASE.
HUMAN-TO-HUMAN CONTACT
IS A NORMAL PART OF LIFE.
AND IT'S THIS CLOSENESS
TO OTHERS THAT SPREADS
THE INFLUENZA VIRUS.
BUT WHAT DO WE KNOW
ABOUT THE VIRUS ITSELF?
TO START WITH, THERE
ISN'T JUST ONE TYPE
OF INFLUENZA VIRUS
- THERE ARE THREE.
DR. STEFAN GRAVENSTEIN IS
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE
AT EASTERN VIRGINIA
MEDICAL SCHOOL IN NORFOLK.
WE HAVE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF INFLUENZA VIRUSES
AND USUALLY WE TALK
ABOUT INFLUENZA A VIRUS,
BUT THERE'S ALSO INFLUENZA
B AND INFLUENZA C VIRUS.
THE INFLUENZA C VIRUS
TYPICALLY CAUSES A MILD
FLU EXPERIENCE, SIMILAR
TO A COMMON COLD.
TYPES A AND B INFLUENZA
ARE DIFFERENT THAN TYPE C.
BOTH ATTACK THE BODY
IN A MORE SEVERE WAY.
FROM ONE YEAR TO THE
NEXT WE GET WHAT WE CALL
"ANTIGENIC DRIFT" WHERE
A SINGLE RNA NUCLEOTIDE,
A SINGLE PIECE OF A RNA
GENE, MIGHT SWITCH
AND GIVE IT A SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENT LOOK
TO THE PROTEIN THAT'S
ON THE SURFACE.
AND THAT DIFFERENT
LOOK IS MORE IMPORTANT
THAN IT MAY SEEM.
IT ACTUALLY MARKS THE
BEGINNING OF A PROCESS
THAT CREATES A BRAND
NEW STRAIN OF FLU;
AND WITH IT, THE
NEED FOR SCIENCE
TO UNDERSTAND HOW THIS
VIRUS HAS CHANGED
SO A NEW VACCINE
CAN BE CREATED.
ONE OF THE SPECIAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF
INFLUENZA VIRUSES
IS THAT THEY HAVE
AN AMAZING ABILITY
TO CHANGE.
DR. KRISTIN NICHOL IS
CHIEF OF MEDICINE
AT THE MINNEAPOLIS
VETERAN'S ADMINISTRATION
MEDICAL CENTER AND
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE
AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MINNESOTA.
BECAUSE THE INFLUENZA
VIRUS IS CHANGING,
SOMETIMES, USUALLY
GRADUALLY OVER TIME,
WE NEED TO MAKE NEW
VACCINES EVERY YEAR
TO KEEP UP WITH THE
CHANGES IN THE
INFLUENZA VIRUSES
THAT OCCUR WORLDWIDE.
AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF VIRGINIA
IN CHARLOTTESVILLE,
DR. FREDERICK HAYDEN
IS PROFESSOR OF INTERNAL
MEDICINE AND PATHOLOGY.
THESE ARE THE TWO
PROTEINS ON THE SURFACE
OF THE VIRUS THAT
KEEP CHANGING.
SO THE FLU VIRUS IS
REALLY LIKE A CHAMELEON;
IT CAN CHANGE ITS COLOR
AND TEXTURE SO THAT OUR
IMMUNE SYSTEM, ALTHOUGH
IT RECOGNIZES FLU VIRUS
VERY EFFICIENTLY,
WON'T PROTECT AGAINST
THE NEW STRAINS
THAT KEEP EVOLVING.
AND IT IS THE DRIFT OR
THE MINOR CHANGES IN
THOSE VIRUSES THAT ARE
RESPONSIBLE EVERY YEAR
FOR MORE OR LESS
LOCALIZED OUTBREAKS
OF INFLUENZA THAT
WE CALL EPIDEMICS.
AND AGAIN, A FLU
EPIDEMIC IS SPREAD
BY THE CLOSE
PROXIMITY OF PEOPLE.
THE MORE PEOPLE THERE ARE
AND THE CLOSER TOGETHER
THEY ARE, THE FASTER
THE DISEASE IS SPREAD.
WELL, FOR HUMAN INFLUENZA
VIRUSES THE MAJOR ROUTES
OF TRANSMISSION ARE BOTH
SMALL AND LARGE DROPLETS
IN THE AIR.
SO THAT AS WE SIT HERE AT
A DISTANCE OF ROUGHLY A
YARD APART, LARGE DROPLETS
ARE BEING GENERATED WHILE
WE TALK AND THESE CAN
SPREAD OVER THOSE KINDS OF
DISTANCES WHERE THEY'RE
DEPOSITED IN THE UPPER
AND LOWER RESPIRATORY
TRACT TO START INFECTION.
AND THERE ARE OTHER WAYS
AS WELL, LIKE COMING INTO
CONTACT WITH A SURFACE
THAT HAS BEEN CONTAMINATED
FROM SNEEZING,
FOR INSTANCE.
AS WE TOUCH THESE
SURFACES WE CAN
UNKNOWINGLY INTRODUCE THE
VIRUS INTO OUR BODIES
BY RUBBING OUR EYES,
OR BY NOT THOROUGHLY
WASHING OUR HANDS
BEFORE EATING.
THERE ARE TWO KINDS OF
INFLUENZA VACCINES
THAT ARE AVAILABLE
RIGHT NOW FOR PREVENTING
INFLUENZA IN THE UNITED
STATES - THE SO-CALLED
"INACTIVATED VACCINE",
WHICH IS THE FLU SHOT,
WHICH IS VERY SAFE
AND VERY EFFECTIVE.
THE SECOND KIND OF INFLUENZA
VACCINE IS A NASAL SPRAY
CALLED "ALIVE ATTENUATED
INFLUENZA VACCINE".
IT'S ACTUALLY A LIVE VIRUS
VACCINE THAT'S WEAKENED
AND CAN ONLY SURVIVE IN
THE UPPER AIRWAY PASSAGES
OF THE ONE
BEING IMMUNIZED.
ANTIVIRAL PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS ARE USED TO BOTH
PREVENT AND
TREAT INFLUENZA.
ACCORDING TO THE WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
WHEN USED FOR PREVENTION,
THEY ARE ABOUT
70% TO 90% EFFECTIVE.
WHEN USED AS A TREATMENT
ONCE A PERSON HAS THE FLU,
THEY CAN SHORTEN SICK
TIME BY ONE OR TWO DAYS.
STUDIES ARE UNDERWAY AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
TO TEST HOW EFFECTIVE
AN ANTIVIRAL DRUG IS
AS DIFFERENT AMOUNTS
OF THE DRUG ARE USED.
THIS TIME THE CULPRIT
IS A VIRUS THAT CAUSES
THE COMMON COLD
AND NOT THE FLU.
LAB SPECIALIST CAROLYN
CRUMP CONDUCTS THE STUDY.
I'M TRYING TO FIND OUT
WHAT IS THE EFFECTIVE
CONCENTRATION OF THIS
DRUG TO USE SO THAT
YOU WILL BE PROTECTED
FROM GETTING A COLD.
THIS LAYER OF CELLS IS
HEALTHY AND HAS NEITHER
THE VIRUS NOR THE DRUG.
NOW WE MOVE ON TO THE
CELLS THAT HAVE THE VIRUS
AND THE HIGHEST
CONCENTRATION OF THE DRUG.
IN THE LEFT LOWER QUARTER
OF THE CIRCLE WE SEE CELLS
THAT FORM A CHAIN.
THESE ARE THE
INFECTED CELLS.
THIS MEANS THAT THE DRUG,
AT THIS HIGHEST STRENGTH,
KEPT 70% TO 75% OF THE CELLS
FROM BECOMING INFECTED.
THEN WE MOVE TO THE NEXT
BATCH OF CELLS WHERE
THE DRUG HAS BEEN
DILUTED TEN-FOLD.
HERE, THE INFECTED CELLS
ARE BIG AND HAVE TAKEN ON
A BALLOONING EFFECT.
THE FLATTER LOOKING CELLS
ARE THE UNINFECTED CELLS.
ANOTHER TEN-FOLD DILUTION
OF THE DRUG HAS CAUSED
ABOUT HALF THE CELLS IN THIS
GROUP TO BECOME INFECTED.
AND FINALLY THE DYING CELLS
HAVE BALLOONED OUT FURTHER,
AND THE DEAD CELLS HAVE
DISAPPEARED ALTOGETHER.
PEOPLE OVER 65 TEND TO
HAVE A MUCH HARDER TIME
FIGHTING OFF
INFLUENZA VIRUSES.
AND HERE AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF EASTERN VIRGINIA,
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR YUPING
DENG IS LOOKING FOR A LINK
BETWEEN THE DECLINE IN THE
LEVEL OF T-CELLS IN OLDER
PEOPLE AND THE REDUCED
EFFECTS THAT INFLUENZA
VACCINES TEND TO HAVE
IN THIS AGE GROUP.
T-CELLS ARE ONE OF
THE MAJOR COMPONENTS
OF THE BODY'S
IMMUNE SYSTEM.
SO, THAT'S ONE REASON THAT
WE LOOK INTO T-CELLS.
SO IF ELDERLY PEOPLE
DO NOT RESPOND WELL
TO A VACCINE WE NEED TO
LOOK INTO THE SOURCE
OF THE NON-RESPONSENESS.
ELDER PEOPLE IN PARTICULAR
ARE MORE VULNERABLE
TO INFLUENZA, COMPARED TO
HEALTHY YOUNG PEOPLE.
SO IT IS AN IMPORTANT
ASPECT OF THE STUDY.
AND 200 ELDERLY PATIENTS
HERE ARE PARTICIPATING IN
AN ONGOING CLINICAL TRIAL,
DESIGNED TO STUDY HOW THE
PROCESS OF AGING AFFECTS
THE BODY'S IMMUNE SYSTEMS.
STAYING AHEAD OF THE
INFLUENZA CURVE IS NOT EASY
AND GETTING BEHIND
IS NOT AN OPTION
BECAUSE THE CONSEQUENCES
COULD BE GREAT.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY,
EVERY 30 TO 50 YEARS
THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT HAPPENS.
AND THAT'S WHEN PANDEMICS
COME ON THE SCENE.
EXCEPT FOR HOW A
PANDEMIC GETS HERE,
IN THE END, THE ONLY THING
THAT MAKES IT DIFFERENT
FROM AN EPIDEMIC IS
THAT SCIENCE HASN'T
HAD THE TIME TO CREATE
A SUITABLE VACCINE.
SO WITHOUT IT THE VIRUS
IS SPREAD QUICKLY.
IN A MOMENT WE'LL
TAKE A LOOK AT
WHAT MANY SCIENTISTS
BELIEVE IS ANOTHER
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC
IN THE MAKING.
THANKS, JULIE.
OVER THE LAST 100 YEARS,
INFLUENZA VIRUS PANDEMICS
HAVE LEFT THEIR MARK.
TO SEE HOW DEVASTATING
THEY CAN BE, JUST LOOK AT
THIS HEALTHY BODY,
HEALTHY MIND Q & A.
AS WE'VE SEEN, THE
INFLUENZA A VIRUS
HAS THE ABILITY TO CHANGE
ITS APPEARANCE AND RETURN
ON THE SCENE AS A
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT VIRUS.
THIS PROCESS IS CAREFULLY
STUDIED TO HELP MAINTAIN
THE BALANCE BETWEEN
VIRUS AND VACCINE.
CORRESPONDENT CARLOS BAINE
LOOKS AT WHY THIS IS
ALSO IMPORTANT WHEN THE
POTENTIAL OF A PANDEMIC
IS ON THE HORIZON.
THAT'S RIGHT PERRY.
A GREAT DEAL OF WORK
GOES ON AROUND THE WORLD,
LOOKING FOR NEW ANSWERS
AND APPROACHES TO
THE PROBLEM OF
INFLUENZA A VIRUSES.
BUT WHERE DO THEY COME
FROM IN THE FIRST PLACE
AND HOW DO THEY FIND THEIR
WAY INTO HUMAN BEINGS?
ACTUALLY, I THINK OF
FLU - INFLUENZA A,
AS BEING A NATURAL
PATHOGEN OF BIRDS.
DR. JOHN TREANOR IS
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE
IN THE INFECTIOUS DISEASE
UNIT AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF ROCHESTER.
THAT'S REALLY THE NATURAL
HOST OF INFLUENZA A VIRUSES.
AND IN BIRDS, THERE IS
AN ENORMOUS DIVERSITY
OF DIFFERENT KINDS OF
INFLUENZA A VIRUSES.
THE CONNECTION OF BIRDS TO
HUMANS IS OF MAJOR INTEREST
TO THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL AND PREVENTION
IN ATLANTA.
DR. NIRANJAN BHAT IS AN
EPIDEMIC INTELLIGENCE
SERVICE OFFICER
FOR THE CDC.
DR. BHAT SAYS THAT BIRD
POPULATIONS ARE THE
BEGINNING OF THE PROCESS
FOR NEW AND DANGEROUS
INFLUENZA A VIRUS STRAINS.
WE THINK THAT THESE
NEW VIRUSES COME FROM
A RESERVOIR IN THE BIRD
POPULATION, PARTICULARLY
MIGRATORY BIRDS, AND THESE
VIRUSES CAN COME INTO THE
HUMAN POPULATION EITHER
DIRECTLY FROM A BIRD
TO A HUMAN, USUALLY
THROUGH SOME SORT OF
INTERMEDIATE HOST
LIKE A PIG OR A DUCK.
IT'S A HUGE PROBLEM,
AND IN SOUTHEAST ASIA
THERE IS A LOT OF
CLOSE PROXIMITY BETWEEN
SOME OF THESE BIRD
SPECIES AND HUMANS.
AND WHEN WE HAVE
OUTBREAKS OF THE AVIAN
OR BIRD INFLUENZA IN THE
BIRDS, BECAUSE THERE'S
SUCH CLOSE PROXIMITY BETWEEN
THE PEOPLE AND THE BIRDS,
YOU INCREASE THE RISK
THAT THERE COULD BE
JUMPING OF THAT
SPECIES BARRIER.
AND JUMPING THE SPECIES
BARRIER IS PERHAPS
THE MOST FRIGHTENING
SCENARIO OF ALL.
IT'S THE INFLUENZA A VIRUS
THAT CAUSES THE PANDEMIC
AND WHEN YOU HEAR, FOR
EXAMPLE, SPANISH FLU
OR THE 1968 FLU OR THE
SWINE FLU PANDEMICS,
THOSE WERE ALL
INFLUENZA A VIRUSES.
WHEN THE INFLUENZA PROTEIN
HEMAGGLUTININ CHANGES
SLOWLY, SCIENTISTS CALL
THIS PROCESS "DRIFTING",
WHICH IS THE NORMAL
YEAR-TO-YEAR CHANGE
IN INFLUENZA A AND
B VIRUS STRAINS.
BUT "SPECIES JUMPING"
HAPPENS WHEN THE
INFLUENZA A HEMAGGLUTININ
ALTERS ITSELF COMPLETELY.
THIS SPECIES "JUMP" GIVES
THE NEW VIRUS A TREMENDOUS
HEAD START, FAR AHEAD
OF SCIENCE'S ABILITY
TO CREATE NEW VACCINE.
THIS IS CALLED AN
"ANTIGENIC SHIFT",
WHICH CAN CREATE A WORLDWIDE
PANDEMIC SITUATION.
SO WHEN PANDEMICS OCCUR -
FOR EXAMPLE, 1918 IS ONE
OF THE CLASSIC ONES WE TALK
ABOUT - YOU HAVE A VIRUS
THAT VERY EFFORTLESSLY
MOVES FROM PERSON TO PERSON
AND DOES SO WITH A
HIGH DEGREE OF MORBIDITY
AND ALSO MORTALITY.
WELL, THE 1918 PANDEMIC
WAS REALLY ONE OF THE
GREATEST MEDICAL
CATASTROPHES IN HISTORY.
THE ESTIMATES RANGE AS
HIGH AS 40 TO 50 MILLION
DEATHS WORLDWIDE,
PERHAPS MORE THAN THAT,
OVER A HALF MILLION DEATHS
IN THE UNITED STATES ALONE
OVER THE MULTIPLE WAVES OF
THAT PANDEMIC VIRUS SPREAD.
BUT WHAT COULD AN
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC
FROM THE EARLY DAYS
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
HAVE TO DO WITH THE
SCIENCE OF THE 21ST?
A LOT.
THAT'S BECAUSE THE STUDY
OF INFLUENZA STILL HAS
LIMITS WHEN DEALING WITH
A SPECIES-JUMPING VIRUS.
WHAT WE'RE EXPERIENCING
NOW IN SOUTHEAST ASIA
IS REALLY UNPRECEDENTED
BOTH IN TERMS OF THE SCOPE
OF THE EPIDEMIC THAT'S
OCCURRING WITHIN BIRDS,
THE NUMBERS OF DIFFERENT
SPECIES AFFECTED, AND THE
WIDESPREAD NATURE OF THE
INFECTION AS WELL AS THE
UNPRECEDENTED LEVEL OF
TRANSMISSION TO HUMANS.
WE'VE NEVER SEEN
THIS BEFORE.
THE BIRD FLU VIRUS
STRAIN IS CALLED
THE H5N1 AVIAN
INFLUENZA VIRUS.
AND PEOPLE ARE VERY
CONCERNED THAT THIS MIGHT
BE THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS
A SCENARIO WHERE THOSE
BIRD FLU VIRUSES GAIN THE
ABILITY TO BE TRANSMITTED
FROM PERSON TO PERSON
AND START EFFICIENTLY
INFECTING PEOPLE AND
SPREADING THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD.
AND THOUGH THE OVERALL
NUMBERS OF INFECTED
PERSONS HAS BEEN SMALL,
ABOUT HALF HAVE DIED.
AND SO THROUGH THE WHO, I
WAS PART OF A TEAM THAT WAS
INVITED TO VIETNAM TO HELP
INVESTIGATE THIS OUTBREAK.
VIETNAM IS ONE OF A
HANDFUL OF COUNTRIES
IN SOUTHEAST ASIA AFFECTED
BY THE AVIAN FLU TO DATE.
DR. BHAT'S TEAM HELPED
THE VIETNAMESE GOVERNMENT
DEVELOP A SURVEILLANCE
SYSTEM SO THEY CAN MORE
ACCURATELY AND QUICKLY
LOCATE THESE CASES.
WORK IS BEING DONE IN THE
UNITED STATES AS WELL.
TAKING WHAT SCIENCE
CURRENTLY KNOWS ABOUT THE
H5 VIRUS, CLINICAL TRIALS
ARE UNDERWAY IN A HANDFUL
OF LABS ACROSS THE COUNTRY
TO SEARCH FOR A VACCINE.
THE UNIVERSITY OF
ROCHESTER IS ONE.
HERE, DR. TREANOR AND
HIS TEAM ARE CONDUCTING
A PHASE I TRIAL USING
AN INACTIVATED SAMPLE
OF ACTUAL H5
BIRD FLU VIRUS.
AND THE FIRST ACTIVITY IS
TO DRAW BLOOD SAMPLES FROM
PARTICIPANTS TO ESTABLISH
BASELINE DATA FOR THE TRIAL.
WELL, THIS IS THE FIRST
TIME ANYONE HAS TESTED
A VACCINE AGAINST
THIS PARTICULAR STRAIN
OF BIRD FLU.
WE'RE DETERMINING WHETHER
OR NOT THAT VACCINE
WILL BE WELL TOLERATED
IN HEALTHY ADULTS,
AND WHETHER IT WILL
GENERATE THE KIND OF
IMMUNE RESPONSE THAT
WE THINK WOULD PROVIDE
PROTECTION
AGAINST BIRD FLU.
HOLD THE GAUZE FOR ME.
YOU CAN REACH OVER AND
TIGHTEN IT, THAT'S GOOD.
PARTICIPANTS LIKE DAVID
BELL SEE THE VALUE
OF TAKING PART.
IT IS SUCH AN IMPORTANT
DISEASE THAT CAN BE SPREAD
AND BECAUSE IT CAN BE
SPREAD SO QUICKLY, AND
ESPECIALLY AFTER, AGAIN,
THE PANDEMIC OF 1918,
IT CAN TURN INTO
SOMETHING EVEN WORSE.
IN ABOUT TWO WEEKS' TIME
PARTICIPANTS RETURN
FOR MORE BLOOD SAMPLES.
THESE SAMPLES THEN GO
TO THE ON-SITE LAB
WHERE THEY'RE SPUN IN A
HIGH SPEED CENTRIFUGE
AT 2000 REVOLUTIONS
PER MINUTE.
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSOR
CARRIE DYKES EXPLAINS.
SO, AFTER THE BLOOD IS
CENTRIFUGED, THE SERUM,
WHICH IS THE YELLOW
LIQUID SHOWN ON THE TOP
AND HE ALOQUOTS SMALL
VOLUMES INTO THESE VIALS
WHICH THEN ARE
CAPPED WITH A CAP
AND STORED AT VERY
COLD TEMPERATURES.
THEY'RE STORED AT -70
DEGREES CENTIGRADE
WHICH IS ABOUT 50
DEGREES COLDER
THAN YOUR FREEZER
AT HOME WOULD BE.
THOSE SAMPLES ARE THEN
SHIPPED TO A TESTING LAB
WHERE THE SERUM CAN THEN
BE TESTED TO DETERMINE
WHETHER THERE'S ANY
ANTIBODIES THAT HAVE BEEN
GENERATED FROM THE VACCINE
FOR THE FLU VACCINE.
WELL, ONE ROADBLOCK
HAS BEEN THAT SO FAR
THE VACCINES HAVE
NOT BEEN AS POWERFUL
AT INDUCING IMMUNITY
AS WE HAD HOPED.
AND IT'S POSSIBLE THAT
WE WILL NEED TO USE
RELATIVELY HIGH DOSES
OR ADD THINGS TO THE
VACCINES CALLED
"ADJUVANTS" WHICH ARE
DESIGNED TO STIMULATE
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
IN ORDER TO GET
EFFECTIVE IMMUNITY
TO THE GREATEST NUMBER
OF PEOPLE POSSIBLE.
AND SO, THE
WORK CONTINUES.
BIRD FLU IS DEFINITELY
A CONCERN FOR US NOW
BUT IT IS NOT
A PANDEMIC YET.
IT'S A VERY TRICKY TOPIC
BECAUSE WE HAVE TO BALANCE
THE NEED TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE PUBLIC IS AWARE
OF THE DANGER AND ARE
ADEQUATELY PREPARED,
BUT NOT TO
PANIC EVERYONE.
IT'S A VERY
UNPREDICTABLE SITUATION.
WE'VE NEVER EXPERIENCED
THIS BEFORE AND THIS MAKES
IT VERY DIFFICULT TO PLAN
BECAUSE WE DON'T WANT
TO OVER REACT, BUT
ON THE OTHER HAND
WE DON'T WANT TO
REACT TOO LATE EITHER.
ALTHOUGH NO ONE CAN
PREDICT EXACTLY WHAT
WILL HAPPEN WITH BIRD
FLU, SCIENTISTS ARE
WORKING HARD TO UNDERSTAND
THE H5 VIRUS BEFORE IT CAN
SPREAD BY WAY OF PERSON
TO PERSON CONTACT,
SETTING THE STAGE
FOR A PANDEMIC.
ALTHOUGH THE MEDICAL AND
SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITIES
ARE CONCERNED, THERE IS NO
GUARANTEE THAT THE BIRD FLU
WILL EVOLVE INTO A
FULL-FLEDGED PANDEMIC.
WHAT MAKES THE MOST SENSE
IS TO CONTINUE TO PROTECT
OURSELVES AGAINST THE
NORMAL FLU EPIDEMIC.
GOOD ADVICE
CARLOS, THANKS.
AND WHETHER IT'S THE
ANNUAL INFLUENZA EPIDEMIC
OR THE POSSIBILITY OF A
PANDEMIC, ONE THING IS KEY;
IN THE END IT'S
VACCINE THAT FIGHTS OFF
THE DEBILITATING
EFFECTS OF THE DISEASE.
I THINK EVENTUALLY
WE'LL BE MOVING TO A
PATTERN OF UNIVERSAL
INFLUENZA IMMUNIZATION
IN THIS COUNTRY AND
ELSEWHERE IN THE WORLD,
IN PART BECAUSE WE'RE
APPRECIATING HOW MUCH
DISEASE AND MORTALITY
INFLUENZA INFECTIONS CAUSE,
AND ALSO THE SOCIAL AND
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES.
SO IT MAKES A LOT OF SENSE
TO USE VACCINES TO TRY TO
REDUCE THAT BURDEN AND
INDEED TO EXTEND THAT
BENEFIT IN TERMS OF
PROTECTION TO A
MUCH BROADER PORTION
OF THE POPULATION.
FOR EXAMPLE, SOMETHING
AS SIMPLE AND OBVIOUS
AS THE HEALTHCARE
PROVIDER GIVING A STRONG,
CLEAR RECOMMENDATION
TO THEIR PATIENT,
THAT YOU ARE AT RISK, THAT
INFLUENZA IS A BAD DISEASE,
THAT VACCINATION IS
A GOOD THING FOR YOU,
MOST PEOPLE WILL
ACCEPT IMMUNIZATION
EVEN IF THEY'RE OTHERWISE
MAYBE SOMEWHAT HESITANT
ABOUT GETTING
A VACCINATION.
THE VIRUS DOESN'T CARE
WHETHER YOU GET SICK OR NOT.
THE VIRUS JUST WANTS TO
MAKE MORE COPIES OF ITSELF.
BUT SOMETIMES THAT PROCESS
OF MAKING COPIES CAN MAKE
THE PERSON WHO'S CELLS
THE VIRUS IS BORROWING
GET VERY ILL AND
THAT'S THE DISEASE,
THAT'S A VIRAL
DISEASE LIKE THE FLU.
AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO PREVENT
BY VACCINATIONS.
ONLY ABOUT 25% TO 30%
OF PEOPLE 65 AND UNDER
GET AN ANNUAL FLU
SHOT IN THIS COUNTRY.
BUT, HAVING THE SHOT
COULD HELP REDUCE
THE OVERALL NUMBER
OF 50 MILLION AMERICANS
WHO SUFFER FROM
INFLUENZA EVERY SEASON.
THAT'S IT FOR
THIS EDITION
OF HEALTHY BODY,
HEALTHY MIND.
I'M DR. PERRY KRICHMAR,
SEE YOU NEXT TIME.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
ABOUT INFLUENZA,
LOG ONTO TO OUR
WEBSITE AT
HEALTHYBODYHEALTHYMIND.COM.
MAJOR FUNDING FOR HEALTHY
BODY, HEALTHY MIND
IS PROVIDED BY
GE HEALTHCARE -
HELPING TO PREDICT,
DIAGNOSE, INFORM AND TREAT
SO THAT INDIVIDUALS
CAN LIVE A FULL LIFE.
AND BY SANOFI AVENTIS -
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD,
EVERYDAY, EVERYWHERE,
WORKING FOR WHAT REALLY
MATTERS - HEALTH.
*